# Mininet tutorial

[Mininet Website](http://mininet.org/)

## Install

Use option 2 when I install mininet on Ubuntu 14.04

## Workflow 

This part can jump

## Walkthrough

### Start Wireshark (GUI)

To view control traffic using the OpenFlow Wireshark dissector, first open wireshark in the background:

```bash
$ sudo wireshark &
```

In Wireshark, click Capture, then Interfaces, then select Start on the loopback interface (`lo`).

### Interact with Hosts and Switches

Start a minimal topology and enter the CLI:

```bash
$ sudo mn
```

The default topology is the `minimal` topology, which includes one OpenFlow kernel switch connected to two hosts, plus the OpenFlow reference controller. This topology could also be specified on the command line with `--topo=minimal`. Other topologies are also available out of the box; see the `--topo` section in the output of `mn -h`.

All four entities (2 host processes, 1 switch process, 1 basic controller) are now running in the VM. The controller can be outside the VM, and instructions for that are at the bottom.

If no specific test is passed as a parameter, the Mininet CLI comes up.

In the Wireshark window, you should see the kernel switch connect to the reference controller.

Display Mininet CLI commands:

```
mininet> help
```

Display nodes:

```
mininet> nodes
```

Display links:

```
mininet> net
```

Dump information about all nodes:

```
mininet> dump
```

You should see the switch and two hosts listed.

If the first string typed into the Mininet CLI is a host, switch or controller name, the command is executed on that node. Run a command on a host process:

```
mininet> h1 ifconfig -a
```

### Test connectivity between hosts

Now, verify that you can ping from host 0 to host 1:

```
mininet> h1 ping -c 1 h2
```

You should see OpenFlow control traffic. The first host ARPs for the MAC address of the second, which causes a `packet_in` message to go to the controller. The controller then sends a `packet_out` message to flood the broadcast packet to other ports on the switch (in this example, the only other data port). The second host sees the ARP request and sends a reply. This reply goes to the controller, which sends it to the first host and pushes down a flow entry.

Now the first host knows the MAC address of the second, and can send its ping via an ICMP Echo Request. This request, along with its corresponding reply from the second host, both go the controller and result in a flow entry pushed down (along with the actual packets getting sent out).

Repeat the last `ping`:

```
mininet> h1 ping -c 1 h2
```

You should see a much lower `ping` time for the second try (< 100us). A flow entry covering ICMP `ping` traffic was previously installed in the switch, so no control traffic was generated, and the packets immediately pass through the switch.

An easier way to run this test is to use the Mininet CLI built-in `pingall` command, which does an all-pairs `ping`:

```
mininet> pingall
```

### Run a simple web server and client

Remember that `ping` isn’t the only command you can run on a host! Mininet hosts can run any command or application that is available to the underlying Linux system (or VM) and its file system. You can also enter any `bash` command, including job control (`&`, `jobs`, `kill`, etc..)

Next, try starting a simple HTTP server on h1, making a request from h2, then shutting down the web server:

```
mininet> h1 python -m SimpleHTTPServer 80 &
mininet> h2 wget -O - h1
...
mininet> h1 kill %python
```

Exit the CLI:

```
mininet> exit
```

### Cleanup

If Mininet crashes for some reason, clean it up:

```
$ sudo mn -c
```

